


address     $33C-$3FB      TBUFFER
Cassette I/O Buffer

This 192-byte buffer area is used to temporarily hold data that is
read from or written to the tape device (device number 1).

When not being used for tape I/O, the cassette buffer has long been a
favorite place for Commodore programmers to place short machine
language routines (although the 64 has 4K of unused RAM above the
BASIC ROM at 49152 ($C000) that would probably better serve the
purpose).

Of more practical interest to the 64 programmer is the possible use of
this area for VIC-II chip graphics memory (for example, sprite shape
data or text character dot data).  If the VIC-II chip is banked to the
lowest 16K of memory (as is the default selection), there is very
little memory space which can be used for such things as sprite shape
data without conflict.  If the tape is not in use, locations 832-895
($340-$37F) can be used as sprite data block number 13, and locations
896-959 ($380-$3BF) can be used as sprite data block number 14.

The types of tape blocks that can be stored here are program header
blocks, data header blocks, and data storage blocks.

The first byte of any kind of block (which is stored at location 828
($33C)) identifies the block type.  Header blocks follow this
identifier byte with the two-byte starting RAM address of the tape
data, the two-byte ending RAM address, and the filename, padded with
blanks so that the total length of the name portion equals 187 bytes.
Data storage blocks have 191 bytes of data following the identifier
byte.  The meanings of the various identifier blocks are as follows:

A value of 1 signifies that the block is the header for a relocatable
program file, while a value of 3 indicates that the block is the
header for a nonrelocatable program file.

A relocatable file is created when a program is SAVEd with a secondary
address of 0 (or any even number), while a nonrelocatable program file
is created if the secondary SAVE address is 1 (or any odd number).
The difference between the two types of files is that a nonrelocatable
program will always load at the address specified in the header.  A
relocatable program will load at the current start of BASIC address
unless the LOAD statement uses a secondary address of 1, in which case
it will also be loaded at the addrss specified in the header.

You should note that a program file uses the cassette buffer only to
store the header block.  Actual program data is transferred directly
to or from RAM, without first being buffered.

An identifier value of 4 means that the block is a data file header.
Such a header block is stored in the cassette buffer whenever a BASIC
program OPENs a tape data file for reading or writing.  Subsequent
data blocks start with an identifier byte of 2.  These blocks contain
the actual data byte written by the PRINT #1 command, and read by the
GET #1 and INPUT #1 commands.  Unlike the body of a program file,
these blocks are temporarily stored in the cassette byffer when being
written or read.

An identifier byte of 5 indicates that this block is the logical end
of the tape.  This signals the Kernal not to search past this point,
even if there are additional tape blocks physically present on the
tape.

1020-1023     $3FC-$3FF
Unused

Four more free bytes.