The 63 numbers, displayed three per line opposite the bit patters they
represent, are the values that would have to be put in the sprite
shape data area in order to display this cross using sprite graphics.

Even after the sprite shape data has been placed in memory, and the
Sprite Data Pointer has been set to display that block of data bytes
as the sprite shape, there are still several steps that must be taken
in order to display the sprite on the screen.

The proper bit of the Sprite Display Enable Register at 53269 ($D015)
must be set to 1 in order to turn on the sprite display.  A horizontal
and vertical screen position must be selected for the sprite by means
of the horizontal and vertical position registers (53248-53264,
$D000-$D010).  Finally, the color value of the sprite should be placed
in the appropriate Sprite Color Register (53287-53294, $D027-$D02E).

Once you have the sprite on the screen, animation is fairly simple to
achieve.  Moving the sprite is as easy as changing the values in the
sprite position registers.  Changing the sprite shape can be
accomplished by merely changing the Sprite Data Pointer to point to
another block of shape data in memory.

There are also some optional sprite graphics features available which
enhance its flexibility.  Sprite expand registers allow you to make
each sprite twice as wide as normal, twice as tall, or both.
Collision detection registers let you know when a sprite shape
overlaps a regular text character or bitmap dot, or if two sprites are
touching.

If a sprite is positioned in the same place on the screen as a text
character or bitmap dot, a Priority Register allows you to choose
whether the sprite or the normal graphics will by displayed.  This
enables three- dimensional effects by letting you choose whether the
sprite goes in front of or behind other objects on the screen.

Finally, any sprite may be selected for multicolor display, using the
register at location 53276 ($D01C).  In this mode, as in multicolor
text and bitmap modes, pairs of bits are used to determine the color
of each double- width dot.  The possible color values which may be
selected are those of Background Color Register 0, the Sprite Color
Register, or the two color values in the Sprite Multicolor Registers
at 53285-53286 ($D025-$D026).