


address        $D400-$D41C
Sound Interface Device (SID) Registers

Mmeory locations 54272-54300 ($D400-$D41C) are used to address the
6581 Sound Interface Device (SID).

SID is a custom music synthesizer and sound effects generator chip
that gives the 64 its impressive musical capabilities.  It provides
three separate music channels, or voices, as they are called.  Each
voice has 16-bit frequency resolution, waveform control, envelope
shaping, oscillator synchronization, and ring modulation.  In
addition, programmable high-pass, low-pass, and band-pass filters can
be set and enabled or disabled for each sound channel.

Since quite a few of these locations must be used in concert to
produce sound, a brief summary of the interplay between some of these
registers may be helpful.

Often the first step is to select an overall volume level using the
Volume Register.  Then, the desired frequency or pitch of the note is
chosen by writing to each of the two bytes which make up the 16-bit
Frequency Register.

An ADSR envelope setting must be chosen by writing values to the
Attack/ Decay and Sustain/Release Register.  These determine the rate
of the rise and fall of the volume of the note from zero volume to
peak volume and back again.  These rates have a great influence on the
character of the sound.

Finally, the waveform must be selected, and the note started (or the
oscillator gated, as we say).  This is done by writing certain bits to
the Control Register.  The waveform control lets you select one of
four different waveforms, each of which has varying harmonic content
that affects the tone quality of the sound.  By writing a 1 to the
gate bit, you start the Attack/ Delay/Sustain cycle.  Afer rising to a
peak and declining to the Sustain volume, the volume will continue at
the same level until you write a 0 to the gate bit.  Then, the Release
cycle will start.  Make sure that you keep the same waveform bit set
to 1 while you write the 0 to the gate bit, so that the Release cycle
starts.  Otherwise, the sound will stop entirely, as it also will if
the Volume Register or the Frequency Register is set to 0.

It should be noted that except for the last four SID chip registers,
these addresses are write-only.  That means that their values cannot
be determined by PEEKing these locations.

Location Range: 54272-54273 ($D400-$D401)
Voice 1 Frequency Control

Together, these two locations control the frequency or pitch of the
musical output of voice 1.  Some frequency must be selected in order
for voice 1 to be heard.  This frequency may be changed in the middle
of a note to achieve special effects.  The 16-bit range of the
Frequency Control Register covers over eight full octaves, and allows
you to vary the pitch from 0 (very low) to about 4000 Hz (very high),
in 65536 steps.  The exact frequency of the output can be determined
by the equation

FREQUENCY=(REGISTER VALUE*CLOCK/16777216)Hz

where CLOCK equals the system clock frequency, 1022730 for American
(NTSC) systems, 985250 for European (PAL), and REGISTER VALUE is the
combined value of these frequency registers.  That combined value
equals the value of the low byte plus 256 times the value of the high
byte.  Using the American (NTSC) clock value, the equation works out
to

FREQUENCY=REGISTER VALUE*.060959458 Hz