


address              $D414          SUREL3
Voice 3 Sustain/Release Control Register

Bits 0-3:  Select release cycle duration (0-15)
Bits 4-7:  Select sustain volume level (0-15)

Location Range: 54293-54296 ($D415-$D418)
Filter Controls

In addition to the controls detailed above for each voice, the SID
chip also provides a filtering capability which allows you to
attenuate (make quieter) certain ranges of frequencies.  Any one or
all three voices can be filtered, and there is even a provision for
filtering an external signal that is input through pin 5 of the
monitor jack.

A low-pass filter is available, which suppresses the volume of those
frequency components that are above a designated cutoff level.  The
high-pass filter reduces the volume of frequency components that are
below a certain level.  The band-pass filter reduces the volume of
frequency components on both sides of the chosen frequency, thereby
enhancing that frequency.  Finally, the high-pass and low-pass filters
can be combined to form a notch reject filter, which reduces the
folume of the frequency components nearest the selected frequency.
These various filters can dramatically change the quality of the sound
produced.

The first two registers are used to select the filter cutoff
frequency.  This is the frequency above or below which any sounds will
be made quieter.  The further away from this level any frequency
components are, the more their output volume will be suppresed (high-
and low-pass filters reduce the volume of those components by 12 dB
per octave away from the center frequency, while the band-pass filter
attenuates them by 6 dB per octave).

The cutoff frequency has an 11-bit range (which corresponds to the
numbers 0 to 2047).  This is made up of a high-byte and three low
bits.  Therefore, to compute the frequency represented by the value in
these registers, you must multiply the value in the high byte by 8,
and add the value of the low three bits.  The range of cutoff
freqnencies represented by these 2048 values stretches from 30 Hz to
about 12,000 Hz.  The exact frequency may be calculated with the
formula:

FREQUENCY=(REGISTER VALUE*5.8)+30Hz

An additional element in filtering is the resonance control.  This
allows you to peak the volume of the frequency elements nearest the
cutoff frequency.