


address           $B9            SA
Current Secondary Address

This location holds the secondary address of the device currently
being used.  The range of valid secondary address numbers is 0 through
31 for serial devices, and 0 through 127 for other devices.

Secondary device numbers mean something different to each device that
they are used with.  The keyboard and screen devices ignore the
secondary address completely.  But any device which can have more than
one file open at the same time, such as the disk drive, distinguishes
between these files by using the secondary address when opening a disk
file.  Secondary address numbers 0, 1, and 15-31 have a special
significance to the disk drive, and therefore device numbers 2-14 only
should be used as secondary addresses when opening a disk file.

OPENing a disk file with a secondary address of 15 enables the user to
communicate with the Disk Operating System through that channel.  A
LOAD command which specifies a secondary address of 0 (for example,
LOAD "AT BASIC",8,0) results in the program being loaded not to the
address specified on the file as the starting address, but rather to
the address pointed to by the start of BASIC pointer (43, $2B).

A LOAD with a secondary address of 1 (for example, LOAD "HERE",8,1)
results in the contents of the file being loaded to the address
specified in the file.  A disk file that has been LOADed using a
secondary address of 1 can be successfully SAVEd in the same manner
(SAVE "DOS 5.1",8,1).

LOADs and SAVEs that do not specify a secondary address will default
to a secondary address of 0.

When OPENing a Datasette recorder file, a secondary address of 0
signifies that the file will be read, while a secondary address of 1
signifies that the file will be written to.  A value of 2 can be added
to indicate that an End of Tape marker should be written as well.
This marker tells the Datasette not to search past it for any more
files on the tape, though more files can be written to the tape if
desired.

As with the disk drive, the LOAD and SAVE commands use secondary
addresses of 0 and 1 respectively to indicate whether the operation
should be relocating or nonrelocating.

When the 1515 or 1525 Printer is opened with a secondary address of 7,
the uppercase/lowercase character set is used.  If it is openend with
a secondary address of 0, or without a secondary address, the
uppercase/graphics character set will be used.