Your new Commodore 1702 color monitor gives you a superior color
picture that enhances your computing experience.  This monitor is
simple to hook up to your computer and is easy to adjust.

Please read this brief manual carefully before you try to use your
monitor.  The manual shows you how to install and use the monitor
correctly.  It also explains how to use the picture control knobs,
which are like the control knobs on a color TV.

Be sure to heed any warnings in this manual, and do NOT remove the
back cover or otherwise attempt to service this monitor.  If you have
problems with your monitor that are not covered in this manual, see
your Commodore dealer or a qualified technician.





CONNECTING THE 1702 MONITOR TO A COMPUTER
The monitor connection cable connects your monitor to a Commodore
personal computer.  Before you connect the cable, turn off the power
to both your personal computer and the monitor.

There are two different cables that you can use to connect the monitor
to your computer.

1. One kind of cable has three jacks that connect to the BACK of the
monitor.

2. The other cable has two jacks that connect to the FRONT of the
monitor.

The kind of cable you'll use depends on your computer.  To find out
which kind of cable you should use, look at the audio/video connector
on your computer (see your computer's user manual if you don't know
where this connector is).

1. If the audio/video connector has EIGHT little holes, use the
three-jack cable.

2. If the connector has FIVE little holes, use the two-jack cable.

To connect a three-jack cable to the rear panel of the monitor, follow
these instructions, which clarify the diagram:

1. Plug the eight PIN DIN connector (the larger end of the cable) into
the audio/video connector port on your computer.  Just push the cable
end in.

2. Plug the RCA pin plugs (the jacks) of the cable into the rear
terminals on the monitor.  The jacks and the terminals are color-
coded:

* the audio output jack (WHITE) plugs into the AUDIO IN terminal
(WHITE) on the monitor
* the luminance output jack (YELLOW) plugs into the LUMA terminal
(YELLOW)
* the chroma output jack (RED) plugs into the CHROMA terminal (RED)

3. Switch the SIGNAL SELECTOR to the REAR position.






To connect a two-jack cable to the front of the 1702. monitor, follow these
steps:

1. Plug the five PIN DIN connector (the larger end of the cable) into
the audio/video connector port on your computer.  Just push the cable
in.

2. Plug the VIDEO IN and AUDIO IN jacks into the VIDEO INPUT and AUDIO
INPUT terminals on the front of the monitor under the screen.

3. Switch the SIGNAL SELECTOR to the FRONT position. The SIGNAL
SELECTOR is a switch on the REAR PANEL.  After you follow these simple
steps, your 1702is ready for useasa video monitor for your personal
computer.






TURNING ON YOUR 1702 MONITOR
When you finish connecting your monitor according to the instructions,
follow these simple steps:

1. Turn on the monitor by pushing down the power switch. The POWER
INDICATOR LIGHT on the front of the monitor shows you when the power
is on.  Always turn on the monitor BEFORE you turn on the computer.

Later, when you're ready to turn the power off, just press the power
button again.  The button will pop back up and the power light will go
out.

2. Turn on your personal computer.  You can tell that both the monitor
and the computer are working correctly when the monitor displays a
message like this one, which appears when you're using a Commodore 64:

[ Graphic partially omitted: Black and white front view of monitor
showing characters, screen, and border. ]

 .-------------------------------------------------------.
 |                                                       |
 |   .-----------------------------------------------.   |
 |   |   .---------------------------------------.   |   |
 |   |   |                                       |   |   |
 |   |   | ****COMMODORE 64 BASIC V2****         |   |   |
 |   |   | 64K RAM SYSTEM 38911 BASIC BYTES FREE . . . . . . Character
 |   |   | READY.                                |   |   |
 |   |   | #                               . . . . . . . . . Screen
 |   |   |                                       |   |   |
 |   |   |                                       |   |   |
 |   |   |                                       | . . . . . Border
 |   |   |                                       |   |   |


Different computers display other opening messages.  If you don't know
what message to expect, see your computer's user manual.





You can adjust your 1702 monitor's picture with the seven manual control
buttons located behind the panel beneath the monitor screen.  The
panel opens from the top; just flip open the cover by releasing it at
the top.






1702 monitor TINT CONTROL
Turn this knob to the left to add more red, and to the right to add
more green color.

The normal setting forthis knob is at the center, which is the click-
stop position.

When you're adjusting the color, concentrate on one or two colors,
such as brown and purple.






1702 monitor COLOR CONTROL
Turn this knob to the left to pale colors, and to the right to
brighten colors.  The normal setting is at the center, which is the
click-stop position.





1702 monitor BRIGHTNESS CONTROL
Turn this knob to the right to brighten the picture.  The normal
setting is at the center.




1702 monitor CONTRAST CONTROL
Turn this knob to the right to increase contrast.  The normal setting
is at the center.





1702 monitor HORIZONTAL POSITION CONTROL
Turn this knob to the right to move the center of the picture to the
right, and turn it to the left to move the center of the picture to
the left.





1702 monitor VERTICAL POSITION CONTROL
Turn this knob to stop vertical rolling of the picture.





1702 monitor VOLUME CONTROL
Turn this knob to the right to increase sound volume and to the left
to decrease volume.






1702 monitor SAFETY PRECAUTIONS

Electrical energy can perform many useful functions.  This unit has
been engineered and manufactured to assure your personal safety.  But
improper use can result in potential electrical shock or fire hazards.
In order not to defeat the safeguards incorporated in this monitor,
observe the following basic rules for its installation, use and
servicing.  And also follow all warnings and instructions marked on
your video monitor.






1702 monitor INSTALLATION

1. Your set is equipped with a polarized AC line plug (one blade of
the plug is wider than the other).

This safety feature allows the plug to fit into the power outlet only
one way.  Should you be unable to insert the plug fully into the
outlet, try reversing the plug.  Should it still fail to fit, contact
your electrician.

2. Operate the set only from a power source as indicated on the set or
refer to the user's manual for this information.  If you are not sure
of the type of power supply to your home, consult your dealer or local
power company.

3. Overloaded AC outlets and extension cords are dangerous, and so are
frayed power cords and broken plugs.  They may result in a shock or
fire hazard.  Call your service technician for replacement.

4. Do not allow anything to rest or roll over the power cord, and do
not place the set where power cord is subject to traffic or abuse.
This may result in a shock or fire hazard.

5. Do not use this set near water -- for example, near a bathtub,
washbowl, kitchen sink, or laundry tub, in a wet basement, or near a
swimming pool, etc.

6. Sets are provided with ventilation openings in the cabinet to allow
heat generated during operation to be released.  If these openings are
blocked, heat built up within the set can cause failures which may
result in a fire hazard.  Therefore:

* Never block the bottom ventilation slots by placing it on a bed,
sofa, rug, etc.;
* Never place a set in a "built-in" enclosure unless proper
ventilation is provided;
* Never cover the openings with cloth or other material;
* Never place the set near or over a radiator or heat register.






USE 1702 monitor 

. Always turn the set off if it is necessary to leave the room for
more than a short period of time.  Never leave a set on when leaving
the house.  A possible malfunction may result in a fire hazard.

. Caution children about dropping or pushing objects into the set's
cabinet openings.  Some internal parts carry hazardous voltages and
contact can result in a fire or electrical shock.

. Unplug the set from the wall outlet before cleaning the face of
the picture tube.  Use a slightly damp (not wet) cloth.  Do not use an
aerosol directly on the picture tube since it may overspray and cause
electrical shock.

. Never add accessories to a set that has not been designed for this
purpose.  Such additions may result in a shock hazard.

. For added protection of the set during a lightning storm or when
the set is to be left unattended for an extended period of time,
unplug it from the wall outlet.  This will prevent possible shock and
fire hazards due to lightning storms or power line surges.

. Do not bring magnetic devices such as magnets or motors near the
picture tube.  These things have a bad effect on the color purity of
the picture.

. Sometimes you may feel static electricity when you touch the
surface of the picture tube.  However, this is normal for any TV set
and is harmless to the human body.






1702 monitor SERVICE

15. Unplug the set from the wall outlet and refer servicing to
qualified service personnel under the following conditions:

A. When the power cord or plug is damaged or frayed.

B. If liquid has been spilled into the set.

C. If the set has been exposed to rain or water.

D. If the set does not operate normally by following the operating
instructions.  Adjust only those controls that are covered in the
operating instructions, as improper adjustment of other controls may
result in damage and will often require extensive work by a qualified
technician to restore the set to normal operation.

E. If the set has been dropped or the cabinet has been damaged.

F. When the set exhibits a distinct change in performance -- this
indicates a need for servicing.

G. If snapping or popping from the set is continuous or frequent while
the set is operating.  It is normal for some sets to make occasional
snapping or popping sounds, particularly when being turned on or off.


16. Do not attempt to service this set yourself, as opening or
removing covers may expose you to dangerous voltage or other hazards.
Refer all servicing to qualified service personnel.

17. When replacement parts are required, have the service technician
verify in writing that the replacements he uses have the same safety
characteristics as the original parts.  Use of manufacturer's
specified replacements can prevent fire, shock, or other hazards.

18. Upon completion of any service or repairs to the set, please ask
the service technician to perform the safety check described in the
manufacturers' service literature.

19. When a video monitor reaches the end of its useful life, improper
disposal could result in a picture tube implosion.  Ask a qualified
service technician to dispose of the set.
