  SIGNAL DESCRIPTION

  Clocks (01, 02)

    The 6510 requires a two-phase non-overlapping clock that runs at the
  Vcc voltage level.

  Address Bus (A0-A15)

    These outputs are TTL compatible, capable of driving one standard TTL
  load and 130 pf.

  Data Bus (D0-D7)

    Eight pins are used for the data bus. This is a Bi-Directional bus,
  transferring data to and from the device and peripherals. The outputs are
  tri-state buffers capable of driving one standard TTL load and 130 pf.

  Reset

    This input is used to reset or start the microprocessor from a power
  down condition. During the time that this line is held low, writing to or
  from the microprocessor is inhibited. When a positive edge is detected on
  the input, the microprocessor will immediately begin the reset sequence.
    After a system initialization time of six clock cycles, the mask
  interrupt flag will be set and the microprocessor will load the program
  counter from the memory vector locations FFFC and FFFD. This is the start
  location for program control.
    After Vcc reaches 4.75 volts in a power-up routine, reset must be held
  low for at least two clock cycles. At this time the R/W signal will
  become valid.
    When the reset signal goes high following these two clock cycles, the
  microprocessor will proceed with the normal reset procedure detailed
  above.

  Interrupt Request (/IRQ)

    This TTL level input requests that an interrupt sequence begin within
  the microprocessor. The microprocessor will complete the current in-
  struction being executed before recognizing the request. At that time,
  the interrupt mask bit in the Status Code Register will be examined. If
  the interrupt mask flag is not set, the microprocessor will begin an

   interrupt sequence. The Program Counter and Processor Status Register are
  stored in the stack. The microprocessor will then set the interrupt mask
  flag high so that no further interrupts may occur. At the end of this
  cycle, the program counter low will be loaded from address FFFE, and
  program counter high from location FFFF, therefore transferring program
  control to the memory vector located at these addresses.

  Address Enable Control (AEC)

    The Address Bus is valid only when the Address Enable Control line is
  high. When low, the Address Bus is in a high-impedance state. This
  feature allows easy DMA and multiprocessor systems.

  I/O Port (P0-P7)

    Six pins are used for the peripheral port, which can transfer data to
  or from peripheral devices. The Output Register is located in RAM at
  address 0001, and the Data Direction Register is at Address 0000. The
  outputs are capable at driving one standard TTL load and 130 pf.

  Read/Write (R/W)

    This signal is generated by the microprocessor to control the direction
  of data transfers on the Data Bus. This line is high except when the
  microprocessor is writing to memory or a peripheral device.