  SID ENVELOPE GENERATORS

    The four-part ADSR (ATTACK, DECAY, SUSTAIN, RELEASE) envelope generator
  has been proven in electronic music to provide the optimum trade-off
  between flexibility and ease of amplitude control. Appropriate selection
  of envelope parameters allows the simulation of a wide range 2: of
  percussion and sustained instruments. The violin is a good example of a
  sustained instrument. The violinist controls the volume by bowing the
  instrument. Typically, the volume builds slowly, reaches a peak, then
  drops to an intermediate level. The violinist can maintain this level for
  as long as desired, then the volume is allowed to slowly die away.
    Note that the tone can be held at the intermediate SUSTAIN level for
  as long as desired. The tone will not begin to die away until GATE is
  cleared. With minor alterations, this basic envelope can be used for
  brass and woodwinds as well as strings.
    An entirely different form of envelope is produced by percussion in-
  struments such as drums, cymbals and gongs, as well as certain
  keyboards such as pianos and harpsichords. The percussion envelope is
  characterized by a nearly instantaneous attack, immediately followed by
  a decay to zero volume. Percussion instruments cannot be sustained at
  a constant amplitude. For example, the instant a drum is struck, the
  sound reaches full volume and decays rapidly regardless of how it was
  struck.

    Note that the tone immediately begins to decay to zero amplitude after
  the peak is reached, regardless of when GATE is cleared. The amplitude
  envelope of pianos and harpsichords is somewhat more complicated, but can
  be generated quite easily with the ADSR. These instruments reach full
  volume when a key is first struck. The amplitude immediately begins to
  die away slowly as long as the key remains depressed. If the key is
  released before the sound has fully died away, the amplitude will
  immediately drop to zero. 
    Note that the tone decays slowly until GATE is cleared, at which point
  the amplitude drops rapidly to zero.
    The most simple envelope is that of the organ, When a key is pressed,
  the tone immediately reaches full volume and remains there. When the key
  is released, the tone drops immediately to zero volume. 
    The real power of SID lies in the ability to create original sounds
  rather than simulations of acoustic instruments. The ADSR is capable of
  creating envelopes which do not correspond to any "real" instruments. A
  good example would be the "backwards" envelope. This envelope is
  characterized by a slow attack and rapid decay which sounds very much
  like an instrument that has been recorded on tape then played backwards.
 
    Many unique sounds can be created by applying the amplitude envelope of
  one instrument to the harmonic structure of another. This produces sounds
  similar to familiar acoustic instruments, yet notably different. In
  general, sound is quite subjective and experimentation with various
  envelope rates and harmonic contents will be necessary in order to
  achieve the desired sound.