


C64 CHARACTER GRAPHICS 
The Commodore 64 has 2 completely different display modes: 
High resolution and Low resolution. This chapter will deal 
with the second of these in more detail, the other being dealt 
with in Chapter 7. 

In Low resolution, the screen is composed of 1000 charac- 
ter locations laid out as 25 lines of 40 characters. AU the 
characters that can be displayed normally on the Low resolu- 
tion screen are contained in ROM in two separate character 
sets. These two character sets are only available one at a time 
and they can be switched between in direct mode by simul- 
taneously pressing shift and the Commodore key. Character 
set 1 contains the upper case characters, the numbers, some 
special characters used within BASIC and a set of useful 
grapliics characters. This is the character set that is in use 
when the machine is first switched on. The second character 
set contains just a lower case character set and an upper case 
character set. There are two common ways to put characters 
onto the low resolution screen from within BASIC and we will 
examine them both in this chapter. 

The first of the two is the PRINT statement. Using a 
function that we shall examine in a moment, the PRINT 
statement is capable of producing some fairly impressive 
graphics and simple animation. In order to produce anima- 
tion, some facihty is needed to enable the program to control 
where on the screen the next character is to be printed. On 
the Commodore 64 this is achieved by inserting cursor move- 
ment control characters into the string that is being printed. 
The function used for this purpose is a string function called 
CHRS. 

CHRS(X) is a string function whose purpose is to return a 
single character string which is the character whose ASCII 
code (American Standard Code for Information Interchange) 
is tlie value of the expression contained in the brackets. 
In this case, the value of X. The contents of the brackets 
must be in the range to 255 or an illegal quantity error 
message will result. The standard ASCII code only contains 
128 characters numbered to 127. The first 32 are special 
control characters, most of which control printers and ter- 
minals with functions like line feed, form feed and carriage 
return. The second 32 characters contain special characters 
used in BASIC like S,( ),+,* etc. and the digits to 9, The 
third set of 32 characters contains the upper case letters and 
the fourth set contains lower case letters. On the Commodore 
64 this is slightly different. The second and third sets of 32 
characters still contain the special characters, the digits and the 
upper case letters, but there the similarity ends. The fourth 
set of 32 now contains a set of graphics characters instead of 
lower case letters and the first set of 32 characters now con- 
tains some special control codes that we are particularly 
interested in. In addition to this character codes 128 to 255 
are also available on the Commodore 64 of which the first 
32 are also of special interest. We will now take a look at a 
simple bouncing ball program and for this we will need the 
following special control codes to use in the CHRS function. 