  OUTPUT TO THE TV

    The simplest form of output in BASIC is the PRINT statement. PRINT uses
  the TV screen as the output device, and your eyes are the input device
  because they use the information on the screen.
    When PRINTing on the screen, your main objective is to format the
  information on the screen so it's easy to read. You should try to think
  like a graphic artist, using colors, placement of letters, capital and
  lower case letters, as well as graphics to best communicate the
  information. Remember, no matter how smart your program, you want to be
  able to understand what the results mean to you.
    The PRINT statement uses certain character codes as "commands" to the
  cursor. The <CRSR> key doesn't actually display anything, it just makes
  the cursor change position. Other commands change colors, clear the
  screen, and insert or delete spaces. The <RETURN> key has a character
  code number (CHR$) of 13. A complete table of these codes is contained in
  Appendix C.
    There are two functions in the BASIC language that work with the PRINT
  statement. TAB positions the,cursor on the given position from the left
  edge of the screen, SPC moves the cursor right a given number of spaces
  from the current position.
    Punctuation marks in the PRINT statement serve to separate and format
  information. The semicolon (;) separates 2 items without any spaces in
  between. If it is the last thing on a line, the cursor remains after the
  last thing PRINTed instead of going down to the next line. It suppresses
  (replaces) the RETURN character that is normally PRINTed at the end of
  the line.
    The comma (,) separates items into columns. The Commodore 64 has 4
  columns of 10 characters each on the screen. When the computer PRINTs a
  comma, it moves the cursor right to the start of the next column. If it
  is past the last column of the line, it moves the cursor down to the next
  line. Like the semicolon, if it is the last item on a line the RETURN is
  suppressed.
    The quote marks ("") separate literal text from variables. The first
  quote mark on the line starts the literal area, and the next quote mark
  ends it. By the way, you don't have to have a final quote mark at the
  end of the line.
    The RETURN code (CHR$ code of 13) makes the cursor go to the next
  logical line on the screen. This is not always the very next line. When
  you type past the end of a line, that line is linked to the next line.
  The computer knows that both lines are really one long line. The links
  are held in the line link table (see the memory map for how this is set
  up).
    A logical line can be 1 or 2 screen lines long, depending on what was
  typed or PRINTed.  The logical line the cursor is on determines where the
  <RETURN> key sends it. The logical line at the top of the screen
  determines if the screen scrolls 1 or 2 lines at a time. There are other
  ways to use the TV as an output device. The chapter on graphics describes
  the commands to create objects that move across the screen. The VIC chip
  section tells how the screen and border colors and sizes are changed. And
  the sound chapter tells how the TV speaker creates music and special
  effects.