


  THEORY OF OPERATION

  SYSTEM INTERFACE

    The 6566/6567 video controller devices interact with the system data
  bus in a special way. A 65XX system requires the system buses only during
  the Phase 2 (clock high) portion of the cycle. The 6566/6567 devices take
  advantage of this feature by normally accessing system memory during the
  Phase 1 (clock low) portion of the clock cycle. Therefore, operations
  such as character data fetches and memory refresh are totally transparent
  to the processor and do not reduce the processor throughput. The video
  chips provide the interface control signals required to maintain this bus
  sharing.
    The video devices provide the signal AEC (address enable control) which
  is used to disable the processor address bus drivers allowing the video
  device to access the address bus. AEC is active low which, permits direct
  connection to the AEC input of the 65XX family. The AEC signal is
normally activated during Phase 1 so that processor operation is not
  affected. Because of this bus "sharing", all memory accesses must be
  completed in 1/2 cycle. Since the video chips provide a 1-MHz clock
  (which must be used as system Phase 2), a memory cycle is 500 ns
  including address setup, data access and, data setup to the reading
  device.
    Certain operations of the 6566/6567 require data at a faster rate than
  available by reading only during the Phase 1 time; specifically, the ac-
  cess of character pointers from the video matrix and the fetch of sprite
  data. Therefore, the processor must be disabled and the data accessed
  during the Phase 2 clock. This is accomplished via the BA (bus available)
  signal. The BA line is normally high but is brought low during Phase 1 to
  indicate that the video chip will require a Phase 2 data access. Three
  Phase-2 times are allowed after BA low for the processor to complete any
  current memory accesses. On the fourth Phase 2 after BA low, the AEC
  signal will remain low during Phase 2 as the video chip fetches data. The
  BA line is normally connected to the RDY input of a 65XX processor. The
  character pointer fetches occur every eighth raster line during the
  display window and require 40 consecutive Phase 2 accesses to fetch the
  video matrix pointers. The sprite data fetches require 4 memory accesses as
  follows:


     PHASE 1   | sprite Pointer |   CONDITION: Every raster
     PHASE  2   | sprite Byte 1  | CONDITION : Each raster while sprite is displayed
     PHASE  1   | sprite Byte 2  | CONDITION :  Each raster while sprite is displayed
     PHASE  2   | sprite Byte 3  | CONDITION : Each raster while sprite is displayed


  The sprite pointers are fetched every other Phase 1 at the end of each
  raster line. As required, the additional cycles are used for sprite data
  fetches. Again, all necessary bus control is provided by the 6566/6567
  devices.