


  UNDERSTANDING WAVEFORMS

    When a note is played, it consists of a sine wave oscillating at the
  fundamental frequency and the harmonics of that wave.
    The fundamental frequency defines the overall pitch of the note.
  Harmonics are sine waves having frequencies which are integer multiples
  of the fundamental frequency. A sound wave is the fundamental frequency
  and all of the harmonics it takes to make up that sound.

    In musical theory let's say that the fundamental frequency is harmonic
  number 1. The second harmonic has a frequency twice the fundamental
  frequency, the third harmonic is three times the fundamental frequency,
  and so on. The amounts of each harmonic present in a note give it its
  timbre.
    An acoustic instrument, like a guitar or a violin, has a very compli-
  cated harmonic structure. In fact, the harmonic structure may vary as a
   single note is played. You have already played with the waveforms
  available in your Commodore music synthesizer. Now let's talk about how
  the harmonics work with the triangular, sawtooth, and rectangular waves.
    A triangular wave contains only odd harmonics. The amount of each
  harmonic present is proportional to the reciprocal of the square of the
  harmonic number. In other words harmonic number 3 is 1/9 quieter than
  harmonic number 1, because the harmonic 3 squared is 9 (3 X 3) and the
  reciprocal of 9 is 1/9.
    As you can see, there is a similarity in shape of a triangular wave to
  a sine wave oscillating at the fundamental frequency.
    Sawtooth waves contain all the harmonics. The amount of each harmonic
  present is proportional to the reciprocal of the harmonic number. For
  example, harmonic number 2 is 1/2 as loud as harmonic number 1.
    The square wave contains odd harmonics in proportion to the reciprocal
  of the harmonic number. Other rectangular waves have varying harmonic
  content. By changing the pulse width, the timbre of the sound of a
  rectangular wave can be varied tremendously.

    By choosing carefully the waveform used, you can start with a harmonic
  structure that looks somewhat like the sound you want. To refine the
  sound, you can add another aspect of sound quality available on your
  Commodore 64 called filtering, which we'll discuss later in this section.