
One time half of the demos had pictures waving horizontally on the
width of the whole screen. This effect is named tech-tech, and the
audience was puzzled. You can move the screen only eight pixels using
the horizontal scroll register. This effect was done using character
graphics. How exactly and is the same possible with sprites ?

Horizontal scroll register can move the screen by eight pixels. This
isn't even nearly enough to produce a really stunning effect. You have
to move the graphics itself, fortunately with a resolution of one
character position (one byte) only, the rest can be done with the scroll
register. During one scan line there is no time to move the actual data,
you can only move a pointer. Changing the video matrix pointer won't
help, because VIC (video interface controller) will fetch the character
codes only at certain times, called bad lines. You can change the
character set pointer instead, because VIC reads the data it displays
directly from the character set memory.

haracter set-implementation has its restrictions

Because horizontal movement is done by changing the character sets, the
picture or text must be pure graphic and the character codes in the
video matrix must be in a numerical order. The normal picture is in the
first character memory and in the next one it is shifted one character
position to the right. One video bank can hold only seven full character
memories besides the video matrix. This limits the movement of the
picture to 56 pixels. It is possible to get more movement if you use
smaller picture or another video bank.

The shift is done so that on each scan line we update the horizontal
scroll register ($D016) with the three lowest bits of the shift value.
We use the other bits to select the right character set ($D018). In a
tech-tech the shift value changes during the display of the whole
picture, and the values are stored in a table. In addition to that, the
shift values should be put into two tables, one for the horizontal
scroll register and another for the character set select. This is
necessary, because there is no time for extra calculations on a bad
line.

Because we have to change the character set and x-scroll dynamically, we
also need a raster routine to show a tech-tech. A raster routine is a
routine which is synchronized to the electron beam. This eats up the
processor time: the bigger the picture, the less time is left over for
other activities. On other than bad lines you can do other funny things,
like change the color of the background or border.