


1581 disk:  VERIFY

  The  VERIFY  command can be used to make certain that a program
file  was  properly  saved  to disk.  It works much like the LOAD
command,  except  that  it  only  compares  each character in the
program  against  the  equivalent  character  in  the  computer's
memory, instead of actually being copied into memory.
  If  the  disk  copy of the program differs even a tiny bit from
the copy in memory, "VERIFY ERROR" will be displayed, to tell you
that the copies differ. This doesn't mean either copy is bad, but
if they were supposed to be identical, there is a problem.
  Naturally,  there's no point in trying to VERIFY a disk copy of
a program after the original is no longer in memory. With nothing
to compare to,  an apparent error will always be announced,  even
though  the  disk copy is automatically verified as it is written
to the diskette.

FORMAT FOR THE VERIFY COMMAND:

  VERIFY "drive#:pattern",device#,relocate flag

where  "drive#:"  is  an optional drive number,  "pattern" is any
string expression that evaluates to a file name,  with or without
pattern-matching  characters,  and  "device#"  is the disk device
number, normally 8. If the relocate flag is present and equals 1,
the  file  will  be verified where originally saved,  rather than
relocated into the BASIC text area.

A useful alternate form of the command is:

  VERIFY "*",device#

It  verifies  the last files used without having to type its name
or drive number. However, it won't work properly after SAVE-WITH-
REPLACE,  because the last file used was the one deleted, and the
drive  will  try  to  compare  the deleted file to the program in
memory.  No  harm will result,  but "VERIFY ERROR" will always be
announced.  To  use VERIFY after @SAVE,  include at least part of
the file name that is to be verified in the pattern.

  One  other  note  about  VERIFY  -- when you VERIFY a relocated
BASIC  file,  an  error  will  nearly always be announced, due to
changes  in  the  link  pointers  of  BASIC  programs made during
relocation.  It  is best to VERIFY files saved from the same type
of  machine,  and  identical  memory  size.  For example, a BASIC
program  saved from a Plus/4 can't be verified easily with a C64,
even  when  the  program  would  work fine on both machines. This
shouldn't  matter,  as the only time you'll be verifying files on
machines  other  than  the  one  which wrote them is when you are
comparing  two  disk  files  to see if they are the same. This is
done by loading one and verifying against the other, and can only
be  done  on the same machine and memory size as the one on which
the files were first created.