1581 disk: RENAMING AND SCRATCHING TROUBLESOME FILES

  Eventually,  you  may  run  across  a  file  which  has  an odd
filename,  such as a comma by itself (",") or one that includes a
Shifted Space (a Shifted Space looks same as a regular space, but
if  a  file  with a space in its name won't load properly and all
else is correct,  it's probably a Shifted Space).  Or perhaps you
will find one that includes non-printing characters. Any of these
can be troublesome.  Comma files,  for instance, are an exception
to  the  rule  that no two files can have the same name. Since it
shouldn't  be possible to make a file whose name is only a comma,
the disk never expects you to do it again.
  Files  with  a   Shifted  Space  in  their  name  can  also  be
troublesome,  because  the  disk  interprets the Shifted Space as
signaling  the end of the file name,  and prints whatever follows
after  the  quotation  mark  that  marks the end of a name in the
directory.  This  technique can be useful by allowing you to have
a  long file name,  and making the disk recognize a small part of
it  as  being  the same as the whole thing without using pattern-
matching characters.
  In any case,  if  you have a troublesome filename,  you can use
the  CHR$()  function  to  specify troublesome characters without
typing  them  directly.  This  may allow you to build them into a
RENAME  command.  If  this  fails,  you may also use the pattern-
matching characters in a SCRATCH command. This gives you a way to
specify the name without using the troublesome characters at all,
but also means loss of your file.
  For  example,  if  you  have  managed  to  create  a file named
""MOVIES",  with an extra quotation mark at the front of the file
name,  you can rename it to  "MOVIES" using the CHR$() equivalent
of a quotation mark in the RENAME command:

  PRINT#15,"R0:MOVIES="+CHR$(34)+"MOVIES"

The  CHR$(34)  forces  a  quotation  mark into the command string
without  upsetting  BASIC.  The  procedure  for  a file name that
includes a Shifted Space is similar, but uses CHR$(160).
  In cases  where even this doesn't work,  for  example,  if your
diskette contains a comma file,  (one named ",")  you can get rid
of it this way:

  PRINT#15,"S0:?"

  This example deletes all files with one-character names.

  Depending  on  the  exact  problem,  you  may  have  to be very
creative in choosing pattern-matching characters that will affect
only  the desired file,  and may have to rename other files first
to keep them from being scratched.
  In  some  cases,  it  may  be easier to copy desired files to a
different diskette and leave the troublesome files behind.