1581 disk:  PARTITIONS AND SUB-DIRECTORIES

  The 1581 allows the user to create partition areas on the disk.
Partitions were originally implemented to provide a mechanism for
easily  protecting  a  particular  section  of  the disk. That is
useful  for  permanently  allocating  part of the disk for things
such as BOOT sectors, CP/M work area, or reserving space for user
defined random files.
  Normally,  sectors on the disk can be marked as used by setting
the appropriate bit in the RAM  (most easily done with the BLOCK-
ALLOCATE  command).  That prevents them from being overwritten. A
VALIDATE command, however, will de-allocate this area. To protect
these  special  blocks from being de-allocated during a VALIDATE,
place them in a user defined partition area. The VALIDATE command
in  the  1581  automatically  skips  over  file  entries that are
partition files (file type = CBM),  which guarantees the intended
area is, and remains, allocated.
  Partition areas are given names by the user when first created.
They appear in the main directory as file type CBM.
  A partition area is created by the following command:

  PRINT#15,"/0:partition name,"+CHR$(starting track)+CHR$
  (starting sector)+CHR$(<# of sectors)+CHR$(># of sectors)+",C"

  Large  enough  partitions  can also be used as sub-directories.
There are, however, certain limitations if a partition area is to
be used as a sub-directory area.

  1) The partition are must be at least 120 sectors in size.
  2) The starting sector must be 0.
  3) The ending sector must be a multiple of 40.
  4) The area to be allocated cannot contain track 40 (the
     original system track).

  Partitions  can  also  be  created with a partition. This means
that  sub-sub-directories can be created if their partitions meet
the above rules. 

  Partition  areas  which meet the qualifications of being a sub-
directory can then be selected by the following command:

  PRINT#15,"/0:partition name"

  Once  selected,  the  partition  are  cannot  be used as a sub-
directory until it is formatted.  The  HEADER or NEW commands are
used  to  format  this  sub-disk  area.  Make  sure that you have
successfully  selected  this partition area before formatting. If
not, the wrong directory area will be reformatted.  You can check
if  the  area  was  successfully  selected  by checking the error
channel. If everything went OK, the error channel would read:

  02, SELECTED PARTITION,first track#,last track#

  If   the   area  you  attempt  to  select  does  not  meet  the
qualifications of a sub-directory,  then  the error channel would
return:

  77, SELECTED PARTITION ILLEGAL,00,00

  Only  one  level of sub-directory can be selected at a time. To
get from the ROOT to PART21 you would have to execute the command
twice.

  PRINT#15,"/0:PART2"
  PRINT#15,"/0:PART21"

  Directories  can only be traversed in the forward direction. To
get  to  sub-directory  which  is  on  a node above the presently
selected node of the tree, you must select the ROOT directory and
work your way down the tree, selecting a branch at a time. To get
to the ROOT directory directly from any node type:

  PRINT#15,"/"

  When the user selects a particular sub-directory area,  it then
becomes  the  default  working  area.  Accesses  to  the disk for
directories, loading files, saving files, etc.,  will all be done
within  this  area.  Files  outside  of  the  selected  area  are
effectively invisible.
  File  and  local BAM information for sub-directories are stored
within  the  sub-directory  areas themselves.  The information is
stored  on  the  first allocated track of the partition area, and
has the same format as track 40.  When  creating  partitions  and
sub-directories  within  sub-directories it is the responsibility
of  the  user  to  make  sure  that  he  doesn't  overwrite  this
information!  The  DOS  only  checks  to make sure that you don't
attempt  to  overwrite  this  information  for the ROOT directory
(track 40).  It  is  up  to  the  user  to  make  sure  that this
information isn't corrupted in the sub-directories.
  Partitioned  areas  can  be freed up  simply by  SCRATCHING the
partition  file  entry  in  the  appropriate  directory.  If  the
partition was being used as a sub-directory,  all of the files in
that sub-directory will be lost.